# Growing Root Models

Only a handful of studies have attempted to model hormone gradients within growing roots ([[@grieneisen2007]], [[@muraro2013]], [[@mahonen2014]], [[@salvi2020]]), and these studies have applied relatively simplistic descriptions of cell and tissue growth ([[@rutten2022]]). Other studies have built highly accurate models of root growth using vertex-element models ([[@fozard2013]], [[@fozard2016]]), but did not incorporate hormone gradients. All models of root growth face the problem of *symplastic growth*, which refers to the fact that cells are unable to move independently of one another because they share a cell wall with their neighbours ([[@ivanov2002]]). This implies that any two cells equidistant from the root tip must be growing at the same rate per unit length at all times ([[@ivanov2002]]). 

Due to the fact that the distributions of auxin and other hormones are spatially regulated in both the transverse and longitudinal directions, defining a growth function that is constant along the transverse axis is challenging. Grieneisen et al. ([[@grieneisen2007]]) tackle this problem by using a Cellular Potts model that restricts growth to the longitudinal direction to prevent cell sliding.  The work of Mahonen et al. ([[@mahonen2014]]), later built on by Salvi et al. ([[@salvi2020]]), instead determine growth by taking an average of the growth factors in all vascular cells and applying it to the entire row. In these models, cells "grow" via the addition of a new row of simulation points to the lattice. Modelling studies of growing roots have consistently found that root growth affects hormone dynamics ([[@rutten2022]]), making developing accurate models of symplastic growth an important area for further study.

