# Root Structure

Crosstalk between auxin and other hormones partitions the root into four zones with distinct growth activities ([[@verbelen2006]]). The division zone spans up to $200\mu m$  away from the root cap junction. In this region, cells grow from $4.5\mu m$ to $9\mu m$ over the course of approximately $18$ hours. On average, the division zone contains around $21$ cells per file, and all cells are mitotic. The transition zone ranges from the top of the division zone to about $520\mu m$ above the root cap junction. Cells in this zone grow to $30\mu m$ over $10$ hours. In the transition zone, vascular cells are not mitotic, but border and epidermal cells are. Rapid cell elongation occurs in the next region, up to $900\mu m$ above the root cap junction. Cells in the elongation zone grow to $135\mu m$ in $4$ hours, before entering the mature zone at their maximum size ([[@verbelen2006]]).

Cells in each of the aforementioned zones belong to one of four types of cell columns. From the outside in, these columns are the epidermis, cortex, endodermis, and stele (vascular). The behaviour of hormones across these columns will be explored further in later sections. Rootward from the cell columns lies the root cap, which protects the root as it grows ([[@kumpf2015]]). In order to preserve this function, root cap cells are continuously created and destroyed ([[@kumpf2015]]). However, most models of the growing root assume the root tip is static ([[@mahonen2014]], [[@salvi2020]]). Between the root cap and cell columns is the quiescent centre (QC), which aids in regeneration of the root cap and promotes division of the mitotic cells above it ([[@matosevich2021]]).  


